\ifndef{mlAndStatisticsInterface}
\define{mlAndStatisticsInterface}

\editme

\section{The Machine Learning and Statistics Interface}

\notes{Machine learning and Statistics are academic cousins, founded
on the same mathematical princples, but often with different
objectives in mind. But the differences can be as informative as the
overlaps.}

\notes{In [@Efron:prediction20] Efron rightly alludes to the
fundamental differences to the new wave of predictive models that have
arisen in the last decades of machine learning. And these cultures
were also beautifully described by Leo Breiman
[@Breiman:cultures00]. }

\notes{Although the prediction culture does not sit entirely in the
machine learning domain, an excellent example of a prediction focussed
approach would be Le Breiman's Bagging [@Breiman:bagging96]. Although
it's notable when he chose to publish the outlet was a machine
learning journal.}

\notes{From my personal perspective, the strand of work that is most
inspirational in prediction also comes from a statistician. Phil
Dawid's prequential ideas [Dawid:callibrated82;Dawid:prequential84],
do provides some hope that a predictive approach can be reconciled
with a scientific approach, in the sense that they allow us to falsify
poorly calibrated models [@Lawrence:licsbintro10]. }

\notes{The quote, apocraphally credited to Disraeli by Mark Twain
"There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies and statistics"
stems from the late 19th century. After Laplace, Gauss, Legendre and
Galton and made their forays into regression, but well before Fisher,
Pearson and others had begun to formulate statistics on a mathematical
basis. Today, the academic discipline of statistics is so widely
understood to be underpinned by mathematical rigour that we no longer
bother to give the domain its full title of *mathematical statistics*,
but the challenges that Efron outlines in [@Efron:prediction20] are
part of a new phenomenon, that which was briefly called "big data". In
the modern world, we can see that there are still three types of lies:
lies damned lies and big data. And the reason is the same as that
which infected the late 19th century, the lack of a rigorous
mathematical underpinning of this new domain.}

\endif
